I always say that we should be grateful to those that have introduced us.
In this case, Jehovah's Witnesses to bloodless surgery, because by means of the ongoing work
on patients that have refused transfusions over the past 30 years, we have gained truly
valuable information.
The first is that blood transfusions are associated with not altogether positive
outcome.
The second is that, with a well thought out approach and with targeted strategies, it
is possible to perform even major surgeries without transfusing halogenic blood.
Well, I've been a doctor for 25 years, so I have witnessed various forms of progress.
The first thing I can say is that the concept of non-pharmacological therapies has evolved.
For example, the use of machines to recycle intraoperative blood.
Techniques of preoperative normal valima chema dilution have been developed.
There is medicine that reduces bleeding, but above all, surgery has evolved.
I witnessed the birth, so to say, of laparoscopic surgery, which is an operative technique that
enables major surgeries with minimal, even zero blood loss.
So we should thank surgical technologies and developments in anesthesiology.
For the steady decrease in intraoperative bleeding, we have seen over the years.
I would say the doctor has the absolute duty to respect the patient's will.
Also because the patient's rightful consent is the only act that authorizes the doctor
surgeon to operate on him, otherwise he would be guilty of an assault.
According to my experience, and what is clear according to international literature,
at least 80% to 90% of all elective surgeries can safely be performed without halogenic blood.